docs: DOC-1066: Vectorization guides (#7499)
deephaven/deephaven-core: docs/groovy/conceptual/vectorization-and-recipes.md

**The recipe paradigm**: Instead of writing step-by-step instructions that process data one element at a time, you define what result you want — like a recipe that describes the finished dish. Deephaven's engine then figures out how to compute it efficiently, processing data in optimized batches.

## The paradigm shift: Imperative vs declarative

### Traditional programming: Imperative SISD

In traditional programming, you write **imperative** code that processes one data element at a time. This is Single Instruction, Single Data (SISD) — each instruction operates on a single value:

```groovy skip-test
// Traditional Groovy: Imperative, SISD
def data = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
def results = []
for (value in data) {  // One iteration at a time
    def result = value * value  // One calculation
    results.add(result)  // One append
}
```

This approach:

- Executes instructions sequentially.
- Processes one data element per instruction.
- Requires explicit loops for multiple elements.
- Creates intermediate objects for each value.

### Deephaven: Declarative SIMD

> Deephaven uses a **declarative** approach. The engine processes data in chunks — Single Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD) — applying one operation across many values at once:

Reviewer: We don't use SIMD instructions; we should not claim that we do.

Author: fixed

```

The engine:

1. Reads column `X` in chunks (e.g., 4096 values at a time).
2. Applies the operation to each chunk (vectorized multiplication).
3. Writes results to column `Y` in chunks.

This approach:

- Amortizes memory access costs.
- Enables vectorization.
- Reduces per-element overhead.
- Works efficiently with CPU caches.

## The recipe paradigm: How it works

### Recipes are specifications

When you write a Deephaven query:

```groovy order=null test-set=groovy-recipe-spec
t1 = timeTable("PT1s").update("X = i")
t2 = t1.update("Y = X * 2")
```

See [`timeTable`](../reference/table-operations/create/timeTable.md) for more details.

You're creating a **specification** (recipe) that says "Y should always equal X times 2". You're **not** executing a loop or directly computing values.

### Lazy evaluation and dependency tracking

The engine builds a **Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)** of dependencies:

```
t1 (source) → t2 (derived)
   ↓             ↓
   X      →      Y = X * 2
```

When data ticks:

1. New rows arrive in `t1`.
2. Engine detects that `t2` depends on `t1`.
3. Engine automatically computes `Y` for the new rows.
4. Updates propagate through the DAG.

> This requires significant additional infrastructure with imperative loops — a loop executes once and stops, so you would need to build your own subscription and recomputation logic.

Reviewer 2: Rephrase to avoid "would need" passive phrasing

> This requires significant additional infrastructure with imperative loops — a loop executes once and stops, so you would need to build your own subscription and recomputation logic.

Author: ```suggestion
This requires significant additional infrastructure with imperative loops — because loops execute once and stop, you need to build your own subscription and recomputation logic.
```

### Update propagation example

```groovy ticking-table order=null test-set=groovy-update-propagation
import static io.deephaven.api.updateby.UpdateByOperation.CumSum

// Create a ticking table (adds row every second)
source = timeTable("PT1s").update("X = i", "XSquared = X * X")

// Add a cumulative sum - updates automatically!
result = source.updateBy(CumSum("SumX = X"))
```

See [`updateBy`](../reference/table-operations/update-by-operations/updateBy.md) and [`CumSum`](../reference/table-operations/update-by-operations/cum-sum.md) for more details.

Watch this table in the UI. Every second:

- A new row arrives in `source`.
- `XSquared` is computed for the new row.
- `SumX` is updated for the new row.

> - **You wrote the recipe once, it runs forever**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

**Write the recipe once, and it runs forever**.
```

4. **Compiles** the generated code.
5. **Executes** the compiled code on chunks of data.

For example, `"Y = X * 2"` might become:

```java
// Generated Java code (simplified)
class GeneratedFormula {
    void apply(DoubleChunk input, WritableDoubleChunk output) {
        for (int i = 0; i < input.size(); i++) {
            output.set(i, input.get(i) * 2.0);
        }
    }
}
```

This compiled code:

- Has no interpreter overhead.
- Can be JIT-optimized by the JVM.
- Can be vectorized by the CPU.
- Runs at native speed.

## Real-time processing: The killer feature

### Why recipes enable real-time

The recipe paradigm makes real-time processing trivial. Compare:

#### Loop approach (doesn't work for real-time):

```groovy skip-test
// ❌ This only runs once!
results = []
source.columnIterator("X").forEachRemaining { x ->
    results.add(x * 2)
}
// What happens when new data arrives? Nothing!
```

#### Recipe approach (automatically handles updates):

```groovy skip-test
// ✓ This updates automatically!
result = source.update("Y = X * 2")
// New data arrives? Y is computed for new rows automatically!

> ```

Reviewer 2: These could be combined into one code block

### Incremental computation

The engine is smart about updates. It doesn't recompute everything - it only processes what changed:

```groovy ticking-table order=null test-set=groovy-incremental
// Ticking source with multiple operations
source = timeTable("PT1s").update("X = i", "Y = X * X", "Z = Y + 10", "W = Z * 2")
```

When a new row arrives:

- Only the new row is processed.
- All formulas are evaluated for that row.
- Results are appended to output columns.
- **Nothing else is recomputed**.

For updates or modifications:

- Only affected rows are recomputed.
- Dependencies are tracked automatically.
- Downstream tables update accordingly.

> ### Real-world example: Live aggregations

Author: ```suggestion
### Example: Live aggregations
```

```groovy ticking-table order=null test-set=groovy-live-agg
import static io.deephaven.api.updateby.UpdateByOperation.RollingAvg

> // Streaming data with rolling statistics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Streaming example data with rolling statistics
```

Or just "Example: Live aggregations" as a heading?

"Real-world" example seems misleading when we use fake data, but maybe that's just how I'm interpreting it.

    "Size = randomInt(1, 100)"
)

// Calculate 10-row rolling average - updates in real-time!
result = trades.updateBy(RollingAvg(10, "AvgPrice = Price"), "Symbol")
```

This query:

- Processes streaming trade data.
- Maintains separate rolling averages per symbol.
- Updates automatically as new data arrives.
- Would be **extremely difficult** to implement with loops.

## Memory efficiency

### No intermediate objects

Loop approach creates objects:

```groovy skip-test
// Creates 1,000,000 Integer objects!
results = (0..<1_000_000).collect { it * it }
```

Recipe approach stays in native memory:

```groovy order=null test-set=groovy-memory-no-objects
// No intermediate objects created for data!
result = emptyTable(1_000_000).update("XSquared = i * i")
```

### Column sharing and copy-on-write

Deephaven uses smart memory management:

```groovy order=t1,t2,t3 test-set=groovy-memory-efficient
t1 = emptyTable(1_000_000).update("X = i")

// t2 shares the X column with t1 - no copy!
t2 = t1.update("Y = X * 2")

// t3 also shares the X column - still no copy!
t3 = t1.where("X > 500000")
```

See [`where`](../reference/table-operations/filter/where.md) for more details.

> Deephaven tables can share their RowSet with other tables in the same update graph that contain the same row keys. This sharing avoids copying data unnecessarily.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deephaven tables can share their `RowSet` with other tables in the same update graph that contain the same row keys. This sharing avoids copying data unnecessarily.
```
